
### Chunk 0: 0:00:00–0:15:00

Może, si?meden finalementmuffled ah ah ah ah ah ah ah Good afternoon. It is Tuesday. It's Tuesday, June 17th at 1 o 1 pm. I am calling this Council Work Session to Order. And we do have Councilor Novik online. Fantastic. Colleagues, we are meeting today to talk through everybody's thoughts on appointments to the police accountability community board. In 2020, if you remember back to that election, we had a police accountability change as part of the charter vote, which was approved by 82% of voters. Earlier this year, we appointed a nominating committee that brought us... that narrowed down, I guess I would say that narrowed down a list of 118 qualified candidates to apply to serve on this board to about 40 people for us to take a look at. And over the last couple of weeks, counselors have had those 40 names and have looked through that list to start to do our work on narrowing that down to 27 people. 21 members for the community board for police accountability and six alternates. Leading up to this work session, counselors took that list of 40 applicants who were sent to us by the nominating committee and picked their top 15, the 15 people who they thought would best serve our community on this board. And we have put together a list of who had the strongest support from counselors and will now fill in that list with some other names to make sure that we have our full suite of candidates. I want to be clear as we start this conversation because I know conversations about who is more qualified or less qualified or fills certain gaps or brings different experiences can be hard for people to hear, especially when we're talking about them. And these are the candidates who have already made it through an extensive vetting process to be determined to be qualified, to be determined to be some of the best qualified. So we don't have any bad choices before us. We just have choices to create, I think, different groups of representation. As we move forward with the discussion today, I hope that counselors, we can all be careful about sharing the personal information from candidates that we received on the applications we looked over, but that candidates in some cases marked asking to be kept confidential and that we're just cognizant of that. And I hope that we can respect their privacy. I hope we can also be aware of the impact of tromas that people listed on their applications as we have this conversation and make sure that we're bringing up the need for representation and experience without inviting scrutiny into individuals past experiences. We have a couple of people here to kick us off today with a presentation. So I'd like to turn it over to Sarah, are you starting us? Sarah Morrissey, okay, to share a little bit more with all of us counselors about what the process has been up to this point so that not only we have that context, but the public watching has that context as well. And in just a few minutes, we'll jump into our conversation. Thank you, Council President. And we will pull up our presentation. And I will kick us off. Hello, Council President Counselors. My name for the record is Sarah Morrissey. I use she her pronouns. And I'm currently serving as the interim deputy city administrator for city operations. I'm joined here with Kristen Thorpe, our limited term employee who was hired as the onboarding administrator coordinator to supporting the community board for police accountability. And we also will be hearing from Timmer Ender, a community member who served as the district one representative on the nominating committee. Next slide, please. In this presentation, we will cover a brief overview of the history of the new oversight system, share a snapshot of the outreach for the opportunity to serve on the board, explain the nominating committee's process on scoring applications and their process for determining their recommendations. Next slide, please. All right, so we're going to start with the history. And Council President spoke to this earlier. But in 2020, the ballot measure 26-217 to change the city's charter on police accountability was approved by 82% of the votes on November 3, 2020. Timelines for the oversight system staffing and operationalization were later incorporated into the DOJ settlement agreement. This can be found in the settlement agreement in paragraph 195 and requires the city to establish the new community police oversight board to replace the office of independent police review for investigations of certain complaints and the chief of police for imposition of discipline for those complaints. The DOJ settlement sets timelines for the new oversight system including when it will start taking complaints. Former city council created the police accountability commission, a community group charged with conducting outreach to the community on the new oversight system and submitted recommendations for code language to council and the mayor. Their work was concluded in September 2023. Using some pack recommendations and considering federal state and local laws, former council adopted city code October 2024 for the oversight system after union bargaining DOJ review and core amendment of the DOJ settlement agreement. In August 2024, Judge Simon who oversees the settlement agreement delayed the selection of the nominating committee council representatives until the new council. And so you all were seated in January 1st, 2025. And so we began the implementation of seating the board. Once you were all appointed, we had the council pick there for representatives, one for each district to finalize the membership of the nominating committee. Next slide, please. Oh, okay, go ahead. I already stepped to that. All right, keep going. All right. So the oversight system, I'm not going to spend a lot of time here just because I want to get through this presentation in a short amount of time, but really the oversight system has two components. So there's the community board for police accountability, which are the community members that we are here to discuss today. And then also the office of community based police accountability, which will be a city bureau with city staff that report to a director. Roles for the board in the office are delineated in city charter 2.10 and title 35 of city code. So I'm going to hand it over to Kristen Thorpe to discuss the nominating committee process. Hello, and for the record, I'm Kristen Thorpe and my pronouns are she, her. The nominating committee is comprised of six community members, one from each district and two representatives from the citizens review council, also known as the CRC, one city representative from the office of human rights and equity, and one representative from the Portland police bureau and two police bureau union representatives. The nominating committee received training guidelines and signed confidentiality agreements before gaining access to any applications. I sent over 250 emails to a variety of community partners introducing the new office and announcing that the application was open. I also worked with city ops and communication to create a website for the office of community based police accountability that will evolve over time and create two rounds of social media posts on a variety of platforms. The recruitment was also featured multiple times in row city connect and civic life newsletter. I want to thank the counselors who promoted it, this opportunity in your newsletter and on your own social media. The application was open on February 28, 2025 and closed on April 14, 2025. After confidentiality agreements were signed, Bureau of Human Resources sent the nominating committee, eligible applications to committee members on a weekly basis.

### Chunk 1: 0:13:00–0:30:00

the city's accountability, which will be a city bureau with city staff that report to a director. Rules for the board in the office are delineated in city charter 2.10 and title 35 of city code. So I'm going to hand it over to Kristen Thorpe to discuss the nominating committee process. Hello and for the record I'm Kristen Thorpe and my pronouns are she, her. The nominating committee is comprised of six community members, one from each district, and two representatives from the Citizens Review Council, also known as the CRC, one city representative from the office of human rights and equity, and one representative from the Portland Police Bureau and two police bureau union representatives. The nominating committee received training, guidelines, and sign confidentiality agreements before gaining access to any applications. I sent over 250 emails to a variety of community partners introducing the new office and announcing that the application was open. I also worked with city ops and communication to create a website for the office of community-based police accountability that will evolve over time and create two rounds of social media posts on a variety of platforms. The recruitment process is very important. The recruitment process is very important. The recruitment process is very important. The recruitment process is very important. The recruitment was also featured multiple times in road city connect and civic life newsletter. I want to thank the Councillors who promoted it, this opportunity in your newsletter and on your own social media. The application was open on the community and community community. The recruitment resources sent the nominating committee eligible applications to committee members on a weekly basis. Before applications were sent to the nominating committee, all personal information was automatically redacted. Each application was given a unique number and throughout the process, each applicant was referred to by their number. The nominating committee scored every application, excuse me, every eligible application, and those that received a 60% or higher score were discussed during the debrief meetings. The nominating committee had a robust discussion of each application, and members led with curiosity and were open to respectful debate. They definitely grappled with tough conversations. The nominating committee voted yes or no to recommend that applicant to cancel. Per city code, applicants who received a majority of the votes six or more yes votes from the nominating committee were referred to. I'm grateful for the nominating committee and appreciate their service and commitment to wanting an inclusive board. So here's an application numbers breakdown. 121 applications were submitted. Three do not need eligibility requirements, so the nominating committee scored 118 applications. 77 of those applications received a passing score of 60% or higher during the eligibility scoring phase. Those 77 were discussed in the nominating committee, excuse me, the nominating committee meetings. 43 applications received a six or more yes vote after each discussion. One applicant dropped out of the process, and so 42 applications went to the next step, which was a conflict of interest check. Only two applications did not pass this conflict of interest check, and so 40 applicants have come to you for your review. Thank you so much for your time today, and thank you for the time today, and now I'll pass it to more to talk about his experience on the nominating committee. Good afternoon, Councillor Pertilgini and council members. My name is Timor Ender. He's proud to be the district one representative on the community board for police accountability nominating committee. I want to start by thanking Councillors Avalos, Dunfee, and our community on this nominating committee. Thank you. In addition to the recruitment that Kristen mentioned, I also did some of my own recruitment, other members of the nominating committee did their own recruitment. I know some council members did their own recruitment as well, so thank you. The community board for police accountability is part of a larger arc of transformation around how police accountability is handled in our community. I think that's a great way to make sure that the community is an important element of the larger effort around shaping police accountability in Portland. In terms of our work on the nominating committee, we felt it was important to create a system that would instill trust. When reviewing applicants myself and others looked for people who brought a variety of different lenses to this work, including mental health, and we made an intentional effort to bring qualified applicants based on the limited scope of information that was provided to us in the form of four SA questions. Based on the limited information we provided, the applicants who received the most support from our committee are those who presented a strong candidates. Our group of 10 nominating committee members brought a wide range of perspectives and backgrounds to the process and engage in thoughtful collaborative discussion around each applicant. We will be valuable resource to council as you make your final selections. My hope is that the work we did instills confidence in our recommendations as a committee and for the public in the development of the community board for police accountability. We appreciate the opportunity to have provided input in this process and look forward to continuing to support the development of the community board for police accountability and the office of community based police accountability over the coming months. Thank you. Thank you all so much for giving us a little background in the process leading up here and especially to more for your time volunteering on this work and all of the other members of the appointing committee who I know put a lot of hours in. We appreciate that you read through all 140 applications. Colleagues, are there any questions about the process that it would be helpful to ask before we get started with our discussion? Councillor Clark? Thank you. Manchanges have a question about our process. Are we going to be selecting the alternatives? We are. And when is that going to happen? That's part of our conversation today. Okay. Any questions for our guests who are here? Yes. Councillor Raion? Thank you all for being here. Great presentation. I'm really hesitant on some of these questions because you want to respect everybody's confidentiality. And so I think I have a question that they won't do. I think I'll be fine. So when I've been looking at the ones that we received, all I've read is the presentation. I'm really hesitant on some of these questions because you want to respect them. I think I've been looking at the questions that we received. All I really had to go with were about three questions that were pretty standard questions as they answered. But I couldn't get a sense of them beyond that. And I think the questions that were asked were the ones you should ask, of course, but there's also a really predictable way to answer them. So my point is I had trouble really. It was hard to make the decisions based on the questions that I had to answer. I was really worried about the questions that I had to answer. I was really worried about the questions that I had to answer. Knowing who my colleagues are, I did a little bit of this. But, you know, so I googled and tried to get a better sense of them. Can I have one agree that that's a fair practice. And I just wondered in your dialogue. Like, did you have more to go on? Like, did they answer more than those three questions? I think that was kind of redacted from us. So we didn't have their names. So you saw the same thing we did. I think that's accurate. Except for their names. Except for their names. Their names were redacted. So they only had the questions. No names were available. We actually had a little more information. Because we had a little more information. We could do a little background digging. The nominating committee actually couldn't do that. We had applicant numbers. So we had a little more information. So I think we had a little more information. So I think that was a little more important. Okay. I just needed that process. Question answered. Thank you. Thank you, Councillor. Councillor Murrio. Thank you, Madam President. I guess I want some clarification because, you know, what was listed said, I do not want my personal contact information to be shared and understand that the city may make every ever to keep my personal contact information confidential. I guess I had marked to be left confidential. And I just wanted to, I wasn't sure if someone could verify that. But, you know, you can sign the public records request. But I haven't seen anything about confidentiality as far as identity or their applications. I guess I'm struggling with how we would have a discussion about the candidates in some concern or benefits that we think they would bring without that. Yeah. And I'll share, Councillor. Councillor, um, Kristen was clear with the, with the committee members or it that there would be, at some point, that's one of the check marks that we put, um, for city applications as well. Um, we can get those numbers from you from BHR for who did check that box. Um, I don't believe that information was readily available to you. So I can get that breakdown from BHR and provide it to you. I believe some of the applications asked that we not share, um, like address and things like that, right? And that was on the application that we saw. But I don't think that names were listed, that confidentiality. I think your guide in this Madam President is what's confusing this question. Because I have a similar question to Councillor Mario. Is it your opening statement made this confusing? How are we going to talk about people without names? I think we, my assumption is that we are talking about names, um, but that the, there were people who had checked the box saying, please don't share my address, my, um, those other pieces of information that are listed in that top section that we had available. Okay, great. Councillor Canone. Thanks. Yeah, that is my understanding as well. And I actually worked with Heidi Brown and, uh, then, um, Mayor Zayd, Stephanie Howard, on developing the text for that, uh, that question or a version of it before. And it does talk about the personally identifying information, PII, if our call correctly, and not the content of their responses. My question, uh, is about the scoring step in the process. And there's a little bit less, uh, transparency for me because this is not laid out in code. You mentioned that there's 60% was a scoring necessary to move on, but I was also, uh, that then that was an average. But I had also been, uh, briefed earlier that this, uh, that if anybody got 60% or higher from even one member of the scoring panel, which is the same as a nominating committee, that that person would still get an upper down vote. Can you speak to that aspect of it that anything beyond the average 60% score? So, each of the four essay questions were out of five points, and each were weighted 25%. And so it took everybody's on the nominating committee's score and then average them together. And that created the 60 or above number or 60 below number. Um, there was an opportunity where we looked at, well, the nominating committee looked at the folks who scored at the 59 level just to see if like there was anybody that could have passed or like should have passed, but maybe didn't because of the averaging, and they all agreed that no, they should not have moved forward. So there, there was a conversation around the people that were fairly close to the 60 point line, and whether they'd be brought into the upper down vote universe. Just the 59 point people, yes. So 58.99 and below did not get that. Correct. There was a gap between the 59 scores and then the 58. There was a significant gap. Thank you. Councillor Sany other questions? Councillor Zimmerman? Thanks. I think related to Councillor Cunnell's. I'm trying to understand then what this chart tells me, because I was reading this as individual members saying yay or nay on individual people, but that's correct. Okay, and that's different than the question scoring? Yes. So everybody read the 118 applications, and they, that's when they got the 60% or higher score. The 77 members that scored above 60 are the ones that are reflected on that sheet, and all of the nominee committee members voted individually for that application, yes or no. There are some blue squares on that page that are for the people that have stained from voting on that particular person. Got it. That might be because they personally know them, and now they've seen the name once we did the original scoring. Now we see names. That's what we're saying here. The nominee committee did not see names, so people abstained based on clues that they picked up in the essay questions and identified that they knew people and so on. Okay. And then given that, what I'm gathering from this list is that the, you had to have at least six of the 10 members vote in your favor to make it to this list, because that seems to be the cutoff here, which is six out of 10, one majority. Correct. Yeah, six out of 10 majority ended up being that 43 number. Got it. And those were the ones that were going to go to the conflict of interest check, but one person dropped out, so it was really 42 that went to that check. Thank you for clarifying that. Yeah, you're welcome. I'm understanding the levels of filtering, and that is quite helpful. Appreciate it. Thank you. Councillor, is any other questions? Okay. Kristen, thank you so much for all of your work on this to more. Thank you so much for all of the time that you and the other volunteers put into filtering down these names for us. And Sarah, thank you for helping to oversee this process. Thank you. We have a couple of things before us. We have all reviewed the 40 applications that were sent to us, and you have a sheet that was sent from Christopher Hare in our council operations office, which essentially shows us based on all of our top priorities for people who we thought should definitely move through the process. Who were the 15 who had the most, the support from the most counsellors? And I'm asking that we enter our conversation today, assuming that those folks will move forward, though if there are significant concerns with any of them, we certainly can consider changes to that. This isn't set in stone, but in order to help us have some semblance of order to this. If we can assume that for the most part those folks will move forward, I think that will help.

### Chunk 2: 0:28:00–0:45:00

the You had to have at least six of the 10 members vote in your favor to make it to this list because that seems to be the cut off here Which is six out of 10 a majority? Correct. Yeah six out of 10 majority Ended up being that 43 number and those were the ones that were going to go to the conflict of interest check But one person dropped out so it was really 42 that went to that check Uh, thank you for clarifying that yeah, I'm understanding the levels of filtering and that is quite helpful. Appreciate it Councillors any other questions Okay Kristen, thank you so much for all of your work on this to more Thank you so much for all of the time that you and the other volunteers put into filtering down these names for us and Sarah Thank you for helping to oversee this process Thank you Have a couple of things before us we have all Reviewed the 40 applications that were sent to us and you have a sheet that Was sent from Christopher Hare in our council operations office Which essentially shows us based on all of our top um Top priorities for people who we thought should definitely move through the process Who were the the 15 who had the most the support from the most counselors and I'm asking that we enter our conversation today Assuming that those folks will move forward though if there are significant concerns with any of them Certainly can consider changes to that. This isn't set in stone, but in order to help us have Some semblance of order to this if if we can assume that for the most part those folks will move forward I think that will help us move through the process And then we have the rest of the list of people who at least one counselor thought should move forward and most of the 40 individuals are on this list, but a few did drop off through this initial vetting process that we did You also have the sheet that counselors Zimmerman held up That shows us how many votes people got from the nominating committee And what I'd like to do is have us talk through Who we need to pick six more people beyond those who are in the top box before us who we move forward as committee And then also six alternates And so I'd like us to start by thinking about Who should move up and I'm hoping that as we have that conversation naturally there will be Some easy divide between the other six who join the committee and who the alternates are and if there is not some easy divide Then we can talk through that, but for now. Let's just generally talk about who we should move Up above that line if you will to that section of names that we're moving forward to be members of the committee or alternates counselor Novick I have a crude suggestion Rather than debating them all one by one I would suggest that we see what happens if we Combine the votes of the nominating committee and the council and And see the six people below the 15 we've already picked who get the most combined votes from both sources See where that gives gets us counselor I would note that you did have at least one colleague who was shaking their head no and didn't like that idea I would also note though that of the individuals who Received a unanimous vote of the nominating committee um The next Of the next seven people below the line on our list five actually did receive A unanimous vote of the nominating committee. So I Would just note those two pieces of information, but because I did see some vigorous head shaking no I don't want to lock us into that that process Counselor Zimmerman is open to it though So why don't we look at Well, let's do this. Let's look at the next Seven down because the next seven down do include five people who were highly scored or who were who were unanimously scored by the nominating committee and They are the next ones who were highly scored here Trish Garner Terrence Hayes Erica Summerfield Deena Ross Benedict Springer Butler Murtaza and Karine Fresh it and I am sorry if I mispronouncing names um Do we want to Start there and just see if folks have thoughts on any of those individuals Counselor Novick is your hand still up or up again You're on mute Okay, counselor Dunphy. Thank you um looking at the I'm gonna just uh Say this for my point in my comment looking at the top eight next candidates in there I just want to voice that I have some concerns about this Body becoming politicized and I note that two of the folks in the top eight are uh were past count uh city council candidates Um and may very well be them again um, so I have some concern about Advancing anybody who who was also already a candidate just especially in this inaugural body because I think that we really need to make sure that This is not a politicized body and I worry about that Thank you counselor counselor Zimmerman Counselor would you have the same concern about people who served as chiefs of staff to commissioners in this body Not inherently I having been a senior official and an elected office and now being elected I do feel like there's a pretty significant difference between working for an elected and Being a candidate yourself. So I have less concern about that um So yeah Okay For Purposes of your question Madam President. I would You stopped at Kareen for shet, but I would say that Robert Weinstein received the exact same numbers as her so that's just one more candidate So it's an artificial cutoff at seven that you said I would say it would be fair to include him in that conversation if you're grouping them together Certainly I had cut it off there because those were um When I noted on my sheet Who the um unanimous vote getters were from the nominating committee it was five of those top seven four of them all in a row ending with Kareen So that's why I made the cutoff, but certainly happy to make the cutoff somewhere else Yeah, I would appreciate that given that there are some people in the top 15 who have a significant number of no votes in this green and pink sheet so Since four of us voted for that that groups everybody in the same That same category I think but open to other thoughts Thank you um and colleagues I put myself in the queue just to note To councilor Don Fee's comment about folks you had run for office and may again One of the conversations will need to have after we talk about Who we'd like to have serve on the board Is how we will determine who holds one two and three year terms and one of the things that we could do to acknowledge that there are people who have run for office and may again Is to think about whether it would make sense for them to be in shorter terms rather than longer terms Uh just to address that concern I that is I mean that is an option certainly to consider and I'd love to have that discussion with the rest of my colleagues here, but um It also I just will note that uh one of the candidates on this list uh ran in district one which is a four-year term so a shorter term might be helpful there one of the candidates ran in district four which is two-year term putting them to a shorter term gives Maybe unnecessarily give a platform to somebody who may be running against one of our colleagues and I just uh I still have some concern about it, but I Yeah, I hear you that for district four and district one We may want to have those conversations separately. I just wanted to note that we have a few tools Councillor Smith Yes, I want to address what uh Councillor Dumpy said um the person that we picked to come out of district one to more To more enter is one of the people who actually ran for district one and he we didn't Downgrade him or marginalized his impact and what he could do in terms of being politicized so This conversation is as as moot as far as I'm concerned Because if we're going to do it on one side of the ball we have to do it on the other side and we didn't do it with two more and he Did an amazing job of presenting today so I wouldn't think that people would be less than professional who are on that top seven So if I mean you know we we have to be careful about what we say and how we say it but um If we're going to allow people to be the people to identify them and they ran for office then we definitely Need to either pull that person off off the committee If we're going to have these kind of you know Benchmarks it was never a benchmark before and I don't think we need to put in Benchmarks just because people ran for office and they might run again That that's kind of silly to me Thank you counsellor counsellor avalus I Can all Thank you, Madam President. This is a very interesting conversation That came up during the police accountability commissions work whether or not this should be a criterion or something that rules someone out Um in evaluating other cities. This is a fairly common rule that uh exists in not a majority but some um And there are some where the rule does not exist where that is one of the criticisms that's been given I would say a few years ago that was a conversation in the Seattle is that um some of the The board were were folks who were perceived as running uh or or doing this to run it did not end up in the Code requirements here. It's not something that is as a rule here. I think it's just interesting And I don't observe that to weigh in on either side of it But I think it's it's notable that this conversation is not new I think that's maybe a helpful reference point I would like to uh maybe argue for a different uh person um on here Um, and this is one of the people who is in that Immediate next tier so anyone that six or more counsellors put on their list Is sort of in that presumptive 15 and and then there's another tier below that with five counsellors and um Before I Argy in favor of of this person. I did want to know charter section to that two-1002 which relates to this Says of the board's membership needs to include and I quote reposition representation from diverse communities Including those from diverse communities and with diverse lived experiences Particularly those who've experienced systemic racism and those who've experienced mental illness addiction or alcoholism And then looking at that next tier. I think Erica summer field is someone who if you look at the the line break between the second to last and last page The page break there that particular question Is someone who clearly fits that in a in a particular way that none of the other people listed do and um I was I was particularly impressed by the commitment to fairness that was in these essay questions Although I also recognize Councilor Ryan's comment on the limitation of the questions But I think as we talk about this and it's an awkward thing to talk about representation and in a well We need to we know one of this category type of way. I'm not trying to do that But as I was looking at the list after the first 15 were sort of discussed and where um Different life experiences might be helpful. I thought that this particular individual made a lot of sense and I'd like to see them um on it if possible Thank you councillor councillor Smith yes Thank you madam President and I also when you talk about representation. I have my staff of the first 15 Tell me which districts these folks came from and eight of them came from district two three came from district three Two nominees came from district one and one nominee came from district four So if we're going to talk about fairness and representation We need to have fairness and representation from each of the districts and I'm looking at a number of people who are in district one who are in that next level so we have to be um Clear on how we're going to approach this if we're going to talk about representation because I can tell you as I'm I'm used to it now But I'm not satisfied with it. I'm used to district one not being represented and We have some candidates in that next level that are from district one that I think is old a um A look in a second look and even if they were Previous candidates for city council. They should not be overlooked as an option Yeah, sure Eight nominees from district two Three nominees from district three Two nominees from district one and one nominee from district four. That's the first time you guys have district four Two each from district three and district four so you must have caught somebody's address wrong For Washington You have to live or work You have to live or work here. So I think we had four total folks on our list who work in Portland, but don't live in Portland one of whom um was on eight of our priority lists And nautisha prat Was on eight of our lists. I don't know she's Was it nine did I get the number wrong Counselor Smith thank you for those comments um I think there are a lot of different ways to look at representation that we need to balance as we go through the discussion today and Part of the city that people live in is certainly one of those um, I was also looking at who Especially for your district might be able to move up councillors emerman Thank you. I am actually hoping that um our city attorney can help us there was a slide that discussed the Community Board of police accountability versus the office of community-based police accountability and I am trying to better understand the two roles here and they remain unclear for me The way that that graphic shows it Only gives me an idea not really a No more person on the street perspective for the two differences of these of and what this graphic is telling us that was in the slide show Just a minute ago. Can you help us out here or help me out at least? Yeah, I'm happy to do so good afternoon council president council vice president all of councils good to see you My name is Heidi Brown. I use she her pronouns and I'm chief deputy with the city attorney

### Chunk 3: 0:43:00–1:00:00

I think we had four total folks on our list who work in Portland but don't live in Portland. One of whom was on eight of our priority lists. Natisha Pratt was on eight of our lists. I don't know, she's. This is. Hmm. Was it nine? I think I get the number wrong. Councilor Smith, thank you for those comments. I think there are a lot of different ways to look at representation that we need to balance as we go through the discussion today and part of the city that people live in is certainly one of those. I was also looking at who, especially for your district, might be able to move up. Councilor Zimmerman. Thank you. I am actually hoping that our city attorney can help us. There was a slide that discussed the community board of police accountability versus the Office of Community-based Police Accountability and I am trying to better understand the two roles here and they remain unclear for me. The way that that graphic shows it only gives me an idea, not really a normal person on the street perspective for the two differences of these of and what this graphic is telling us that was in the slide show just a minute ago. Can you help us out here or help me out at least? Yeah, I'm happy to do so. Good afternoon, Council President, Council Vice President and all of Councils. Good to see you. My name is Heidi Brown. I use she-her pronouns and I'm Chief Deputy with the City Attorney's Office. So the charter calls for there to be a board and they are the decision makers or governing body as far as investigations and discipline. But it also calls for the board to hire a director who will be a board of the city employee and also that director then hire staff investigators and administrative staff who perform the investigatory work, the administrative work of that, of what the board will want. And so that's the distinction. So the community board for police accountability, the board of the CBPA, that's the one appointed by the council and then they will hire the director of the Office of Community-Based Police Accountability. That office will be a city bureau or office if you will and that director will then hire staff. They hire that director who will then hire that staff. Yes. And in that situation, that director works for a body of volunteers with no city executive oversight whatsoever. That's predominantly correct. There is some in the code on Title 35. There are provisions for how they do certain operational work. So they do, the director does have a line underneath the deputy city administrator who's more in this position. And so for purposes of operationalizing, also adoption of administrative rules will ultimately be decided by the DCA. So predominantly they are hired and firing decisions are in code the authority of the board. Okay. That is fascinating. Okay. I will hold thanks for that. It's very helpful. I appreciate it. Thank you. Councillor Riyan. Thank you, Madam President. And I really appreciate this longer list of the nominating committee votes. It's very helpful. I think that when I see that there were four no votes from the nominating committee that sticks out to me and when I look at the criteria, I assume that the committee was really focused on that criteria. But again, I'm doing a lot of assumptions. So all of us wish we could of course, then, fly in the wall to hear the conversations we weren't. But based on the information I have, which are just tallies, it seems as though there weren't a lot of four no votes. But there are some and a few of the other things that I think are going to be a little more in the top ring that Councillors approved. And so I'm uncomfortable moving forward with those that received four no votes. But I'd love to hear a little sense of what that dialogue was like in the room, if that's possible. Like, can't you give me some generalities on what that was like for someone to actually speak to a no vote? I think it took some courage. They took their job very seriously. All these folks, of course, and I want to thank them again. But I'd like to understand the significance of those no votes. Because four again does really stick out. And when I look at the criteria, I'm sure that if you overlay that, they're having a nice little conversation here in the front row. What is Councillor Ryan getting at? And how do we answer this question? Timmore, if you are interested in responding to this, we would certainly welcome your input. Councillor Cousin, I would like to ask you a question. If you have any questions, I would refer to Kristen on this. We understand it is up to you. And that's a heavy responsibility to representing the entire body. So thank you. Yeah, I'll just say Councillor Ryan, the vote speak for themselves. This was a confidential process. And every person on the board had certain reasons for voting yes or no, and one thing I mentioned in that body was, you know, you don't have to justify to anyone else in this room, which way you're voting. And so each person voted with a vote. I think that's a very important part of the question. I think that's a very important part of the question. I think that's a very important part around who they wanted to move forward or not. And so I think it's most appropriate for me to say those votes that you see on your paper are seeing for themselves. Okay, so there are only four that received four no votes. I can't see your papers. I apologize for that. But yeah. It's just a piece of paper that tallied up all your results. I trust Kristen's a great job on that. So. So I have a discussion about those that received three. I think we're trying to get at that that dialogue here, the criteria for membership qualifications and restrictions and qualifications for members of commitment to please accountability fairness and ensuring that PPP policies do not violate state capability of making fair objective and partial decisions restrictions of serving on the board include a bias or against law enforcement. I trust that when someone did a no vote, they were zeroing in on that criteria. For that be a fair assessment. We as a nominating committee basically delegated that power of just residency requirements, all of those other kind of qualification requirements to Kristen and her team. And so we looked at the essay questions in terms of our grading. And so we kind of, and we basically left it to city employees to figure out all of the qualification and background and things like that. Well, I'll just make it really clear that both three and definitely four no votes stick out to me and I'd have a really hard time moving them along in the process at this moment. Thank you. Councillor, I would note that there are people who received even more than four no votes. They just are not on our list. So I think we have a lot of people who are not on our list because somebody had to receive majority support from the nominating committee to move forward to us. So what you see here as six yes votes or four no votes are not the bottom of the list total. They are the bottom of the list that we received because anybody with less than that didn't even make their way to us for consideration. So I think that's the point of the question. I think that's the point of the question. And my statement is also true. Both things can be true. But from the information we received, these are the ones that received four votes and three votes. No votes. Thank you. Councillor Avalos. Yeah, picking up a little bit off of that, I mean, I think as it relates to the question on whether people's yes or no vote was relevant to their bias. I don't know that that would be, I can't see how that would be relevant to their bias. But they were neutral, right? Like I don't think every candidate was strongly in bias on either side. So I don't know. Of course that could be a factor, but I don't think it would be the factor. That's just my observation. But on that note of bias, I think picking up a little bit on Councillor Dumfie's note, I think the biggest thing probably, the biggest problem that I have with the folks who were former candidates is less about the election. And more of that, they're, they have a more public record of their opinions about police. And in particular, those two candidates are over and over on the public record, not just as candidates before the election, but up till now have a very obvious bias in favor of the police. One of those candidates literally put together a whole press conference in support of police. And to me, that would be, that's a disqualifier. I think the people who are very vocally for or against that, that just seems, that's the way I am judging that decision. And I don't, I will not be voting or moving anyone forward. That has that very obvious public record. That seems to me. Like that would really jeopardize how others would view the people that we selected. If we place people on the committee who were, you know, as candidates were endorsed by the police, this is a police accountability board. And I mean, I'm sorry, I'm somebody who has worked in police accountability work. I'd have a really hard time moving someone forward on a board that is supposed to hold the police accountable if they are very favorable to the police union. That, to me, seems like a very obvious bias that is part of this process that we're trying to avoid. So I just wanted to state my feelings about the candidate and the bias. And that's kind of how I'm landing on that. And I'll leave it at that for now. Thank you, Councillor Smith. Madam President, I do disagree with my colleague Councillor Ovalos because we're not supposed to get an entire board that's anti police. We're supposed to get a board that can look at both sides and try to come up with an even solution. If that was the case then, we should have just, I won't say that, but anyway, I disagree and I think it's wrong. And there are some clear divisions on this council on who they support and who they don't support. So I don't think that our biases should be showing through on how we perceive the police or perceive the police in the community. And that's why you have different people who are identifying different individuals to show up in this space and to be a different kind of answer. I'm not putting together anti police board. I am putting together a board that can make decisions based on information and not just someone who's going to write down this, you know, defund the police kind of narrative or hate the police narrative and be hard on the police narrative. That's not what we're doing. We have to have a different criterion in which we identify folks. Because if that was the case, I would have never voted for the person that we identified as our person. They did not get, to more, did not get, he was a candidate for a council and he did not get an endorsement from the police. So, if I can look at a 30,000 foot level at who would be good regardless of their stance on police, we should not be, I'm going to go and say this, Councillor Zimmerman, picking these winners and losers and when we got folks who are from District One, who are clear, and I'll be clear on who I'm talking about. I don't know the two you're talking about, but I'm talking about Terence. I think we need his voice. I think we need his diversity and I think we need his understanding of police, particularly from the standpoint as a father, a black man, and someone who was incarcerated. So, I think we need to be very careful on how we try to eliminate folks from this discussion. Thank you, Councillor. As we, I'm next in the queue here. As we think about who we want to move forward, I'm thinking back to conversation I had. Councillor Canalka, can I share some of a conversation that we had about what it means to approach this work independently or neutrally and what we should be looking for and the importance of not just having no opinion but having lots of opinions that balance each other and the importance of finding balance for this board. And so, you know, I'll share that on the list of names that I put forward, there were some folks who I think were, who have had interactions with the police that led them to having very negative relationships with the police and also some folks who I put forward who had personal interactions with the police that led them to having close relationships because I think it's really important to have both of those perspectives on the board. Terrence was on my list for that reason, but so worse than people who I think he probably wouldn't see eye to eye with on a lot of things. And I hope that we can all support names who, names of people whose personal positions might make us a little bit uncomfortable as long as they are people who we think are able to hold many truths and move forward based on the facts of an individual case as opposed to holding hard and fast positions that can't change. I also, you know, we shared the votes from the nominating committee at the request of and out of respect for our volunteers who put a lot of time and hard work into this, but they were looking at the same information we were. So I hope that we don't let their votes overrule our votes or vice versa. I think in fact, from my perspective, the sweet spot might be the spot where we're looking at the same information and the same information we were looking at. Where we both thought highly of people or maybe it is people they thought highly of and we thought highly of, but I don't think that we should discount either their positions or ours given that we were working off of the same information and trying to get to the same balance and have the same charge. Councillor Cannell. Thank you, Madam President, and I appreciate you for supporting the work of advisory groups has always been that every person in Portland should be able to look at every advisory group and say maybe it doesn't.

### Chunk 4: 0:58:00–1:15:00

negative relationships with the police and also some folks who I put forward who had personal interactions with the police that led them to having close relationships because I think it's really important to have both of those perspectives on the board. Terrence was on my list for that reason, but so worse than people who I think he probably wouldn't see eye to eye with on a lot of things. And I hope that we can all support names who, names of people whose personal positions might make us a little bit uncomfortable as long as they are people who we think are able to hold many truths and move forward based on the facts of an individual case as opposed to holding hard and fast positions that can't change. I also, you know, we shared the votes from the nominating committee at the request of and out of respect for our volunteers who put a lot of time and hard work into this, but they were looking at the same information we were. So I hope that we don't let their votes overrule our votes or vice versa. I think in fact, from my perspective, the sweet spot might be the spot where we both thought highly of people, or maybe it is people they thought highly of and we thought highly of, but I don't think that we should discount either their positions or ours given that we were working off of the same information and trying to get to the same balance and have the same charge. Councillor Cannell. Thank you, Madam President, and I appreciate you sharing that. My position supporting the work of advisory groups has always been that every person in Portland should be able to look at every advisory group and say maybe it doesn't represent my worldview, maybe I don't agree with everybody, but there's at least one person on that group that is saying what I would say if I was a member. And that lends itself to the diversity of viewpoints that I think we're trying to seek and that I think we're finding in this list and trying to bring up and to that end and to the point that Councillor, Council President raised, I put a Korean for shet on my list and I worked with Korean on the Police Bureauwide Advisory Committee and found that there's a person that can evaluate a case independently. I also wanted to speak to Dean Ross, who's in that first tier specifically I mentioned just below the other person I mentioned Erica Summerfield. And in looking through that application, again at that same question, the page break question, someone who's worked in terms of their own also their personal viewpoint but also having the experience of working with the Jewish community, which is a community that's relationship with police is not often discussed in the police accountability space. That was something that I found particularly unique and something that I think it lends itself well to putting this person on and I don't know either the two people that I'm speaking in favor of here in any way, Erica or Dina, but I was impressed with both of their applications and the things that they have in their background or experience that are different from the 15 people that are presumptively in. Thank you, Councillor, Councillor Murillo. Thank you, Councillor President. Sometimes I feel like on this dius I want to just roll the clip back about what somebody said because it's very obvious that colleagues have preconceived notions about each other and then they're not listening to each other and they are just making assertions about one another that are maybe politically convenient or helpful because what I heard Councillor Avalos say very clearly was that she had looked for people who could hold truths in both directions and that was part of how she made her choices and she has worked in many spaces where she's had to talk to people that she doesn't agree with so I just don't really appreciate that when we're having this discussion that for some reason upholding the status quo is viewed as neutral but anything else is viewed as biased. Both are a range of perspectives and we have that on this council in a pretty balanced way I would say. For the most part on many of our votes we're around six to six so I think it's healthy for us to have some different ideas intention based on our differences and lived experience and I just want to emphasize that while we're having this discussion I also want to point out that even in the original nominating committee we had representatives from PPB, PPA and PPCOA so the idea that the police perspective is not represented in the applicants that we received is just not accurate we had lots of their perspectives and it's fine. I also agree with Councillor Dunnfees' assessment on the governance aspect of this because there is actually a substantial difference between someone being on a nominating committee who ran for office that is a shorter period of time you are putting forth other applicants and then it's over the folks who actually sit on this board are going to be having some of the most tense discussions on policing especially during this political moment and if we have people there who are going to use this as an opportunity to grandstand to the public about their positions rather than be neutral then we are creating a political problem rather than having neutral people actually working in this space so I would say that those are two very different things and that needs to be addressed and as far as the candidates that I like obviously you can see which ones I ranked but as an immigrant I'm advocating for the two immigrants of color on the list, botla and onchal to be appointed to this board their voices and lived experience are really essential to building a system that truly reflects and serves all of the people of Portland especially in this moment so thank you. Thank you Councillor. I'm going to jump over to Councillor Green because he hasn't said anything yet. Thank you Madam President. I wanted to also provide some perspective on current for shet. This is a person who has been very vocally displeased with my decisions in office particularly around a decision to cut $2 million, $1.9 million from the police budget and give it over parks but this is also a person who has stayed in dialogue with me and has shared their experience on how they navigate from their perspective on the ground conditions in old town where people are suffering. They have I think a pretty nuanced maybe not always at times from my perspective perspective on what public safety means as a holistic perspective. I'm not always going to agree with Corinne but I appreciate the willingness to look at a position with some objectivity even if a social media post is not the way that I would express myself. I think I would be comfortable advancing Corinne forward. Generally I'm going to refer to a diversity board. I want people of color, people of lived experience but I also know that Robert Weinstein made some posts that I don't agree with and enjoy but has some experience evaluating quasi judicial outcomes which is also an important part of this job. Taking off the personal opinion hat and saying what are the facts in the position and I also think that's pretty important. It may be difficult for us to reconcile as a collective group what other six we need to put forward. If we get in a bind I do think there's a reasonable word the unanimous yeses if we can't agree maybe advance some of those forward. Those are just kind of how I'm thinking about things right now but I wanted to name those two specific individuals. Thank you Councillor. Councillor Cannell. Councillor Avalos. Thank you Councillor Modio for what you said completely agree. I want to state for the record I never said that it would be we're going to be putting a bunch of anti-police people on the board so I really resent that comment and don't appreciate my character being put into question so I want to make that very clear. I also want to say that I think as somebody who was on the citizen review committee and then was on it and then became a candidate and then all of that I put myself in that same category. If I was looking at my application right here I would be putting myself in the same category of probably not the best person. She just ran for office. She has publicly stated opinions about police that are one way or the other and that would be a bias that I would be holding myself to that same standard so I don't agree with the assertion that I am trying to put people on this board that are for one side over the other. I am trying to remove people from this board who are very actively vocal in the community about one particular side because then that to me feels like it will de-legitimize the perceived neutrality of this board. If we put a bunch of people on it who have been very vocal for a particular side so I just wanted to clarify that. I also want to say, as council president you said that they were all looking at the same information. Yes, but they didn't have their names. So let's be clear that we had more information than the people ranking because it sounds like some people were doing some googling and we're able to do some cross checking so just wanted to state that for the record. Although yes, agree. They had the general information but we do have a little bit of an advantage because we were able to see their names so I wanted to state that. Thank you, Councillor Ryan. Thank you, Madam President. You know, we've been in some heated conversations lately about funding because it's budget season and in my opinion we had a false narrative put in front of us between parks and police and because someone has spoken to favor police funding during this budget cycle does not mean that they are pro police all the time. It doesn't mean that they don't believe in accountability. It doesn't mean that like me they probably are noticing that the current chief is really leaving a culture towards community policing that we haven't seen before. And so I think we have to be careful not to take the heat of the current dialogue we're having about that and impose it on this. I really appreciate your comments earlier. Councillor Green, I do want to call them out. I think we went at this in a similar way. I was trying to do that balance thing as well. And I have now some history on some people I actually was cool with that don't say very nice things about me but I think they would bring the checks and balances that are needed. Since we're talking about a certain person in particular and his name has been brought up, I'll just say that you know Terrence Hayes has lost a member and the police involved has lost a family member and a police involved use of force. He was incarcerated. He chose to take those incidents and learn to build a better community. He has never said he doesn't want police to be accountable. He just said he wants police to be part of the solution to make his community safer. So I just hope that we stop politicizing this so much that we can't look at the individual character and what they bring to the table to bring that elegant balance that's needed in this body. And so I just wanted to make those points. I'm still crystal clear that if someone got a no vote, four of them and they didn't even know their names, that says something. And so I think I am still clear that they should be removed from this body. Thanks. Thank you Councillor. Councillor Xammerman. Thanks. I want to start with I appreciate Councillor Greens' comments about current for shet and we're at Weinstein. I have similar support for them. They were on my list and I don't think we've all seen actually each other's votes. So I actually don't know who's supported because we don't have a list of everybody's votes. But I did support Bob Weinstein. I did support Corinne and I appreciate that. I'm a little bit troubled by the implication because the words were said by showing that you're pro police that that wouldn't be okay to sit on on such a board. I think that anybody who knows my record knows that I'm I guess by de facto, I'm probably pro military by having been a part of it for a long time and I'll just share in my role previously in commanding officer positions. I have a duty in that role when I had those roles to administer nonjudicial punishment to soldiers who broke policy, broke the uniform code of military justice and that's a heavy weight. And I do think that you can one of the things that I think can keep a board and accountability board and internal review board, things of that nature. One of the things that can be powerful about it is if there is such a cultural need to make sure that we do deal with those who are stepping outside the norms of policy and culture and the law and expectations. And that happening from those within is also an important part. And in this case obviously there are no police sitting on this board. But I think that to assume because somebody has a pro in our words on this, Dias, a pro stance that they can't then also provide decision-making that is fair and just, particularly given what we heard earlier, is that there will be a staff who is assigned and hired up to help with the investigations is unfortunate. And I think that that that Terrence Hayes was also on my list a lot of for a lot of the reasons are given the fact that I think that Mr. Hayes has been described by this body as pro police and I probably have been to and I think we look awfully darn different. And I think we have awfully darn different experiences. And I think that's okay. I think the irony or the hypocrisy is a little thick right now in terms of sitting or not sitting on a board and whether or not a person runs or doesn't, right? There were people in this body who came up with a charter review to then become candidates. There are people in this body who've sat on different committees and assignments over the years. I've sat on one of the many police boards at a time or another. So I just think that while this is a political decision, it would be great that their decision making not be political. I do think that sometimes their selection is political and they've got a duty and I don't know that they'll take a note but I think they'll take a commitment to fair application of the law. I definitely am not going to support any people on this list who received four no votes from the nominating committee. There are two that are in that top 15. And in the world of bias or not bias, I think one of them is a former chief of staff to the sponsor of this and reading that Commissioner Hardesty proposed measure. I think it's 26 to 17, which is what established this. Her chief of staff received no four no votes. And in the materials that person is also, I only know their chief of staff.

### Chunk 5: 1:13:00–1:30:00

particularly given what we heard earlier is that there will be a staff who is assigned and hired up to help with the investigations is unfortunate and I think that that Terrence Hayes was also on my list a lot of for a lot of the reasons are given the fact that I think that Mr. Hayes has been described by this body as pro police and I probably have been to and I think we look awfully darn different and I think we have awfully darn different experiences and I think that's okay. Um I think the irony or the hypocrisy is a little thick right now in terms of sitting or not sitting on a board and whether not a person runs or doesn't right there were people in this body who came up with a charter review to then become candidates there are people in this body who sat on different committees and assignments over the years I've sat on one of the many police boards at the time or another so I just think that while this is a political decision it would be great that their decision making not be political I do think that sometimes their selection is political and they've got a duty and I I don't know that they'll take a note but I think they'll take a commitment to fair application of the law. I I definitely am not going to support any people on this list who received four no votes from the nominating committee there are two that are in that top 15 and in the world of bias or not bias I think one of them is a former chief of staff to the sponsor of this and reading that commissioner hardesty proposed measure I think it's 26 to 17 which is what established this her chief of staff received no four no votes and in the materials that person is also I mean I only know they're a chief of staff because of the materials but we're not raising a concern there and I feel like if we're going to raise concerns let's actually do it but let's not just raise concerns that you have to be you can't be have ever said that your pro police or you can't have ever said that something good about the police I don't know that that's the world we live in I think it's okay to say it but if we're going to go down that path we've got we've got some folks on both sides and let's be honest about it but that actually is not the reason that I am not going to be supporting that person it's because four members of a body without knowing the even they're said this is not a person so those those two that are in the list with four no votes from the Lombonae Committee are at my concern and I really appreciate Councillor Smith you mentioning the district representation and I will just say if we were able to get Bob Weinstein and and Corinne in there that would increase the district for representation by two and I would feel much more comfortable about that and last plug for Corinne I'm pretty sure she's served on Lombonae County's jail inspection community team which if you're unaware of the county commissioners and the public have to inspect the jail every year for fairness and humane treatment and from my memory she did that quite honorable and quite well 
[1:13:00]
thank you thank you
========================================

Councillor Councillor Smith thank you Madam President I agree I think district representation is is really important and and great district representation who knows the issues who who's been in the space that that can offer comments and strategies that are that are coming from a really authentic space in place and you've already said it um commissioners I mean Councillor Zimmerman um we have people on this board who actually created the charter to even get this form of government who who are sitting on this board um and everybody knows who that is that is my seat mate um Councillor Avalos Councillor Avalos yeah I know your name Mama I um I think it's important and when I was running for office just for the record I was asked in very many places and spaces that did interviews on who to support and I never once changed they asked who did I want to support and who did I want to serve with I said Terrence Hayes and Candace Avalos everywhere I went it wasn't just for um for show I said that everywhere I went now I was not her person but I did not think and that's okay too but I know that for the most part people know that I can look from a 30,000 foot level and look at an issue and decide based on my experience my track record my background that I am able to make a decision and so for me I don't think we need to put these guard rails up I think we need to let some of them down so that district one and district four can have folks like Bob Weinstein and Terrence Hayes which they both were running it is really this this this this work is really tough work and sometimes we can't get people to even volunteer to come twice a year to something so to have people who are willing to give of their time and it doesn't matter which side side of the political spectrum they're on and they're willing to do this and they can speak from this from experience and from a track record I think we need to look at those folks and say they might be someone who was very valuable to this process and we should not be putting up guard rails around um campaigns and in those kinds of things because it just doesn't it's flat I mean it is a flat situation because we have all kind of you know we have all kind of things going on up here that that um we have to show that their uh conflicts of interest I mean we even voted for somebody's wife to get money so we can't sit here and be so um stoic as if we have not done things too so we've done it and I can look at that and say you know what this is a good issue we need to we need to so I wish that we would really stop it that we would really stop trying to prevent people who are older and I can tell you there were very few people in that charter review committee that were older with experience like Bob Weinstein and I think his voice is important and those voices are important because they didn't have we had a bunch of young folks who just wanted to throw away all the older people so um yeah but that's just my opinion that's that's the way it looked and that's the way it turned out but um when we when we start start talking when we start going down uh uh an alley we need to make sure that we don't have some some things too so I support terns haze I support Bob Weinstein I don't care that they ran for office before they're they're very seasoned and um and who they are and and what their opinions are and I think that they they'll be valuable on this committee 
[1:14:30]
thank you thank you
========================================

counselor counselor Novick um thank you madam president I just wanted to put in a plug for three people um two of whom really appealed to me the the basis their professional and um volunteer background Benedict Springer who got 10 votes from the nominated committee um and first-generation immigrant who works for the public utility commission and therefore is familiar with working within quasi-judicial processes and then Chris Gardner who got 10 votes the nominee committee and five votes from us who has a background who is who's worked on the fit cod and also as a background as a criminal defense lawyer uh and also as a prosecutor turns out and then finally there's somebody who appealed to me because of how it's decypic she was in talking about how she would make decisions um it's Sarah Cicrimon who said in response to question 15 um how would you approach the uh trying to decide if policy was violated and decide with discipline should be given um she said among other things compare the facts of the Portland police bureau has written policies and training standards to determine whether a violation occurred consider prior discipline cases and consistency with precedent making fair proportional and disciplinary recommendations and that might seem obvious but most people did not say things like that and suggested to me that she's thought a lot about what the details of their job entail thank you counsellor uh counsellor Clark i don't believe we've heard your voice yet on this thank you madam president um i'm not going to dive into personalities or people but i'm going to offer up uh proposal just to keep the ball rolling here you know i felt pretty good that in the top 15 i got 30 percent i was going to oh that's pretty good but i have a lot more people on the bottom list um but i was going to propose just to move this forward that i agree with uh counsellor ryan and uh my friend zimmerman uh that we should or whatever i call him um that we should the record she calls me an evil twin i think but uh we're there keep going counsellor and i as we say counsellors in ryan yeah sorry counsellor that guy um i agree that we disqualify the people who got the four no votes and that takes two people off the top list and then when you start going down the secondary list it takes off the third person um so i would like to propose we consider the top list and the green section minus the two that did not uh that got four no votes and we move down the second tier all the way down to i think Todd Bateman and exclude uh the person who got the four no votes then that includes see that's trish garner taren seis dino ross bendick springer batia rataza korean frishet uh Weinstein and i think Todd Bateman of my math is right so i think that would solve all of our problems um and i would like to move that i think it's a pretty balanced list i don't know what your process is uh man i'm present but that's my proposal we are in a work session so we can't take motions and vote but i am trying to i'm trying to see where folks are enough that we know what we can bring forward tomorrow so i would say colleagues as we continue to move through discussion one of the options on the table um is to look i think you said through Todd bateman i'd noted i'd note that that's a cutoff in the middle of the three so i don't know if anybody would argue for Todd over Sarah or Sarah over Todd but um so through Todd bateman minus folks who only got six yes votes out of the nominating committee so that's an option um my guess is as we continue to talk there will be other options put forward on how we could look at this but that is one option colleagues that has been put on the table that we could think about we would then still need to come up with our six um alternates and i think there's a lot of different ways we could think about the alternates i think that is with the six alternates isn't it i believe that would get us to 21 people i count that as 24 minus three so that would be the committee is 21 and then we need six alternates that's okay it doesn't have to be a complete proposal for everything that's okay it is a proposal the 15 was a first cut at trying to get a sense of um where council priorities light so man in present just in the name of simplicity then i would just take that bar and lower a little bit and then we would include the candidate that uh councilor Novick was discussing and maybe another okay anything else councilor okay thank you councilor canal thank you madam president um when you have a review process of this nature um and you come up with 15 and the reason why i think the council president went with 15 as opposed to looking at the top 21 rankings there can often be gaps in what you have uh we've obviously talked about the district gap that's a real one in the initial 15 but there are other gaps as well and in this particular case our obligations is that is that quote that i read earlier about ensuring uh racial diversity as as well as uh experiencing so experiencing systemic racism and those who've experienced mental illness addiction or alcoholism so this exercise allows us to look into these 22 people that are in the gray uh who got five one to five and say uh you know here's a gap that the 15 have and bring them in that doesn't necessarily get reflected in who had the most within the gray and so i just want to bring that up i think uh councilor mario mentioned one specific one where we have uh and i'm pretty sure this name was reversed in the application mrtaza botla um as someone who gets called canal i guess my first name a lot i want to make sure i get this right so please correct me if i'm wrong um mrtaza botla and unshelsharda who are not they're not in the same place in the gray both are are uh immigrants of color um and identified as such in there so i i want to just caution against the quick fix element here uh a little bit the other thing i want to caution against and i'm not even a caution i'll just go full at it is this idea of four no votes um i want to note that there are three members and if you look at the actual graph not just that line on the right and you see the grouping of votes that collectively the pattern that emerges in those four the people who had four no votes i will note that there were three people who were uh representatives of of the police bureau the police rank and file union and the police the tenancy union on there and so to see that you know they've that two of the people on here one is someone who's associated with a former commissioner that's tied to this work the other is a is a member of the police accountability commission um and so i want to make my my argument for for that person i i have the the privilege of working with tim pits who is someone who i think is incredibly balanced detailed oriented and willing to hear everybody out as a member the police accountability commission he was one of the replacement members he was not there the whole time um and so he was uh coming into a process that one could choose to stand against or endorse fully and he chose option three which is to help shape it in ways that that reflected his experience he's a business owner he's someone who represented a small business community in that particular there were categories of membership on the police accountability commission and i i i think it's fairly clear here that some of the folks who had particular backgrounds in working in this space had a block of no votes i don't know who they are um but that that happened and you can look at the the columns of red and green on the folks that had four the idea that if one has stood in favor of police accountability um one needs six out of seven votes whereas if one has not one needs six out of ten

### Chunk 6: 1:28:00–1:45:00

and identified as such in there. So I want to just caution against the quick fix element here a little bit. The other thing I want to caution against, and I'm not even a caution, I'll just go full at it, is this idea of four no votes. I want to note that there are three members, and if you look at the actual graph, not just that line on the right, and you see the grouping of votes that collectively, the pattern that emerges in those four, the people who had four no votes, I will note that there were three people who were representatives of the police bureau, the police rank and file union, and the police attendance union on there. And so to see that, you know, that two of the people on here, one is someone who's associated with a former commissioner that's tied to this work. The other is a member of the police accountability commission. And so I want to make my argument for that person, I have the privilege of working with Tim Pitts, who is someone who I think is incredibly balanced, detailed oriented, and willing to hear everybody out. As a member of the police accountability commission, he was one of the replacement members, he was not there the whole time. And so he was coming into a process that one could choose to stand against or endorse fully, and he chose option three, which is to help shape it in ways that reflected his experience. He's a business owner, he's someone who represented a small business community in that particular, there were categories of membership on the police accountability commission. And I think it's fairly clear here that some of the folks who had particular backgrounds in working in this space had a block of no votes. I don't know who they are, but that happened. And you can look at the columns of red and green on the folks that had four. The idea that if one has stood in favor of police accountability, one needs six out of seven votes, whereas if one has not, one needs six out of 10 votes is a problematic statement, but that's how it has gone. And I also do recognize the concern here, I'm not disagreeing, and I want to actually thank Councillor Zimmerman for raising this issue because when you mentioned that if someone has on the day as a pro stance, that they could also provide decision making that it's fair and just, I agree with that. And I want to commend you because in February, when I raised this issue at the community and public safety committee, you didn't have that view, and I commend you for listening on it. Because this is the exact point I was raising in the resolution I raised in the community and public safety committee on February 25th, that we need people that are not evaluated based off of whatever they may have said about the police, but we need them to be evaluated on can they look at the facts of the case and make a decision based on it. And I agree with Councillor Zimmerman that I think people we appoint to this will honor their duty if we are able to evaluate people that are able and have shown through the limited information we have that they're able to be fair and just. And that's the criteria I'm applying to, that's why I have not argued against some of the folks that have been argued against here because I think that that's something that we can achieve with people that have a wide view of policing, wide range of views on policing. But this this for no vote thing, I would strongly support keeping all 15 of the people that are presumptively in, that's the process we agreed to. And I think if there's a particular reason around one person that we can speak to their individual reasons why they should or should not be on it, I would be very open to hearing that. But if it's just the nominating committee had a block that voted no and then one other person voted no as well, that is not a compelling answer for me, for a wide change. And President May I ask, Councillor Connelly question. Just could you clarify, just sure, the two the names were Timothy Pitson, what was the other one? The other person is Carly Edwards. They're five folks who got six to four. I'll note that 30, I wanna say 36 people got ruled out for having five or fewer votes. They're not on this list as the council president noted. But there are five people that did have a six four vote that are in this list. Two of them, Edwards and Pits are in our presumptive 15. And I have argued in favor of a third, which is Erica Somerfield as well. So I just wanted to raise those three. And you can look at the columns here and see the pattern of no votes. And again, I don't know which three they were, or which four they were. And again, there's some difference across who the fourth vote was. But I just wanted to raise that issue. Thank you, Councillor. Councillor Clark did that answer your question. Councillor rodeo. Well, I was gonna say everything that Councillor Canal said probably not as nicely. So I'm glad that he covered it. I agree. I think the six to four, removing anyone who had four nose seems to be a pretty reductive way of looking at this. And if this body and council is going to have a discussion about how people who have had what would be generally framed as more pro police stances on there and the belief that they can remain unbiased, then we should have that same energy for people who have faced police brutality, who have publicly stated their displeasure with the police, et cetera, we have to hold those same standards across the board. I also agree with Councillor Canal that both of those candidates, pits and edwards are, I think perfectly capable of doing that and holding difficult conversations. I mean, I worked with Carly Edwards. She was the chief of staff when I worked in Commissioner Hardestie's office. And I'm sure that everyone remembers what happened to Commissioner Hardestie when she was in office. The fact that she got framed by the Portland police union for a hit and run that never happened, the story that went national that had broad impacts. So this idea that there are, we don't know who the no votes were or what happened, but I think that she is perfectly capable of holding that nuance given a lot of the difficult things that are boss and our staff experienced at that time. So I think it's a little reductive to just remove people like that, given that they were one of the few that actually had six nominating committee votes as well. I also really want to elevate a few of the names on the list and I'll just read their names off. Particularly Trish Garner, Erica Summerfield, Dina Ross, Botla Mortaza, Sarah, Cidderboum and Jason Ashley. Thank you, Councillor, sorry. I'm capturing that last name that hadn't been put on the table yet. Yeah. Yeah, I think the way that I'm looking at this and as somebody who also had to review CRC applications and assess what, you know, how we're doing our best to judge if these people can judge the situation and do it fairly with minimal bias. That's where I'm coming from. I think everyone's made their points and I don't think comparing other situations is germane right now. I also think that we should, I think it's most fair honestly to keep our top 15, right? We had this process for a reason. I think all of those folks, you know, we all felt good about so much so that they made it to the top 15. I don't think we should mess with those at all. And then I think the people I want to elevate are Trish Gardner, Erica Summerfield, Deena Ross, Balta Mortaza, Jason Ashley, Anchal Sharda, was that everybody? I think I missed one. Hold on, I'm looking back up. Trish, Erica, Deena, Balta. Oh, and I think Sarah, Citroenbaum, I think I missed. I want to elevate that one as well. Thanks. Thank you, Councillor. Colleagues, I want us to trust our work. Colleagues, I want us to trust our work. We're not picking a jury where people try to figure out who they don't want. We're trying to figure out who a lot of people can trust. And Councillor Conelli, you said the actual number, so I'm gonna ask you for the number and not do the math. How many people were left off the list by the nominating committee? How many people had five or fewer yes votes? 30, something or 40 something? It went from 79 to 43 if I recall correctly. 77 to 43. So 33. So 34 people were cut from the list because they couldn't get a majority of votes of the nominating committee. Another three didn't make any of our lists as a top priority candidate. That means that everybody were looking at here, had a lot of people, at least seven people, at least six members of the nominating committee and one of us who thinks that they can hold things from multiple perspectives. That they have a good sense of how to find balance here. I'm not gonna speak to you of the three who folks have talked about cutting Carly Edwards because I know her personally, but both Timothy Pits and Eric Summerfield actually were on my list because they both seemed like people who could find balance. And I didn't have, right, none of us had this list at the time, but I knew that they had support from a majority of the nominating committee. So I just asked us to trust ourselves and to trust the nominating committee that we put together. I try with things like this to not offer a frame for how we should make our decision moving forward because I don't wanna help the scale and I know ultimately I'll be bringing a proposal forward to all of you, but I'm going to right now as we talk about how to move forward because it seems like we need some additional framing. And I just note that if we looked at everybody who at least two of us said should be a priority and above that line, that would get us to 30. We need 31 total. If we added in 31 if you count, oh, 27, I'm sorry, you're right, we need 27 total. Hold on, I wrote down the wrong number. Let me do my math again. No, that's okay. If we look at everybody above the three, thoughts what I was trying to say, if we look at everybody above the three line, that would get us to 25. There we go. That's the number I was looking for. And then we've heard the names, the name Jason Ashley, get added to the list below that number. We have heard and she'll shard as a potential to add to the list. I was impressed by Linda Glendz application as well. But we might actually look at who had six or more nominating committee members support them and three or more councillors put them on our priority list and then add in two more. And that would get us to 27. And then where there are individuals who folks are less comfortable with, we might think about moving those folks to alternate positions. And I would just suggest that as a potential frame that we could look at. Councillor Zimmerman. I'm doing math in public after what you just read in. So thank you for all consider that. I think that what Councillor Clark proposed was also, actually I'd like to Councillor Novick's Councillor Clark's and I think yours makes some sense to me too, Councillor Prousset. I'm not sure Councillor Avalot so I understand why your insistence is, let's trust the process on the 15 out the above but not below. That doesn't make sense to me. You named somebody who had one vote only but you made it insistent of let's stick with the 15. That one was really clear. Are you saying that below the 15 we should throw it all in a mixer or what are we, I'm trying to understand what your last statement was which is trust the process for the 15. That's what you said. But then after that, what do you mean by that? I don't think I put, I didn't put a denominator on what to do with the gray. I think we're all, I didn't make a suggestion for what to do with the gray. I was suggesting that the 15 that rose to our list total since we have to get to 27. That to me made sense like, okay, we've got a solid 15 that made our list that we shouldn't mess with that 15 and then the gray, I don't know, I mean, I haven't, I didn't make a suggestion for what to do with the gray. I just gave some names that stuck out to me as everyone else was doing. Okay. I, I would like to see some more district four representation, of course, but I certainly don't think that district four has to have equal representation. I think that we can achieve a good or without district four putting its feet down and saying we must have the same. I just don't think that's the case in our city. Given that, in fact, the names that others have shared, Trish Garner and Sarah Citrambaum, these are names that I also had on my list, but they fell lower in terms of, I guess it's Angelita Miansteeve who supported those folks, at least for the three. I think there's a reasonable path here and I think that you're thinking, Council President, makes sense to me. If folks can get off of the idea that a previous candidate is not eligible, then I can be, I think, much more open to the four or you're the chief of staff of the lady who proposed this thing. I think, but there's got to be a little gift here and I think let's be reasonable about it. But if it's just a board where one side of this, which is the majority of our council is gonna go, but then those of us who are a little bit more on the pro police side have no say, then I'm gonna put my foot down on the no four. If you helped write the measure, probably don't need to be on it, but if we can get over that, then I think what Council President has proposed sounds reasonable to me. I'd be curious where folks are at. And while that was crafty, Councilor Canal about our previous conversation in February, I think there's a difference between overt bias and having previously established a position or a thought on a topic and I don't think that that has changed here, but thank you. Thank you, Councilor Coyama-Laine. I'm sorry, I didn't realize you were on there and hadn't spoken yet previously. Okay. I appreciate how seriously we're taking this important decision. I think our discussion defined the path forward together for our community is admirable. However, I'm not totally sure that like further discussion is going to uncover new information here or move any of us from current perspectives. I'm happy to list the folks that rose to the top for me that are below that line. Dina Ross, Erica Summerfield, Sarah Centron-Bahn, Jason Ashley, Harry Shehan, Onchal Sharda. And I think just a little bit more clarity on what the next steps are would be helpful. So is this supposed to be mostly a broad discussion and then Council President, you'll be putting together a list that we vote on tomorrow, just each candidate need to get a certain amount of votes tomorrow, revoting on a package. Thank you. I am hoping we can get to a place where we can vote on a package. My goal coming out of today was that we would have a discussion that led in a clear direction where I could say, okay, it's pretty clear Council's all on the same page here. There's a little great.

### Chunk 7: 1:43:00–2:00:00

but then those of us who are a little bit more on the pro police side have no say, then I'm going to put my foot down on the no four. If you helped write the measure, probably don't need to be on it, but if we can get over that, then I think what Council President has proposed sounds reasonable to me. I'd be curious where folks are at. While that was Crafty, Councilor Canall about our previous conversation in February, I think there's a difference between overt bias and having previously established a position or a thought on a topic. And I don't think that that has changed here, but thank you. Thank you, Councilor Coyama-Lane. I'm sorry, I didn't realize you were on there and hadn't spoken yet previously. Okay. I appreciate how seriously we're taking this important decision. I think our discussion to find the path forward together for our community is admirable. However, I'm not totally sure that it, like, further discussion is going to uncover new information here or move any of us from current perspectives. I'm happy to list the folks that rose to the top for me that are below that line. Dina Ross, Erica Summerfield, Sarah Centran-Bahn, Jason Ashley, Harry Shehan, on Charles Sharda. And I think just a little bit more clarity on what the next steps are would be helpful. So is this supposed to be mostly a broad discussion? And then, Council President, you'll be putting together a list that we vote on tomorrow. Does each candidate need to get a certain amount of votes tomorrow? Revoting on a package. Thank you. I am hoping we can get to a place where we can vote on a package. My goal coming out of today was that we would have a discussion that led in a clear direction where I could say, okay, it's pretty clear Council's all on the same page here. There's a little gray area here, but I'm going to take my best guess at what I heard and bring a package for tomorrow that we could either pass or ideally pass and at worst pass with just a few tweaks. We need to do three things to get there. We need to figure out who the folks are, who we're interested in moving forward, how we might want to determine who the alternatives are. Is it as I suggested the folks who are above a cut but have discomfort expressed by a handful of Councillors? Is it a look at representation, whether that is experience or race or discernivity and trying to make a cut based on that? But if there are strong opinions about how we make that kind of alternatives versus not. And then the third thing is we do need to determine who is in one, two, or three year terms. We could do that based on how much support somebody had. We could do that with a random number generator, which we could ask our staff to encounter operations to run for us. I'm sure there are many other ways we could determine that as well. I think we're only I made a list as I was taking my notes, three or four people who specified the length of term that they were hoping to serve for and everybody else said whatever was needed. So those are the three decisions that I need to get some sense of a signal from everybody on today is who we want to move forward with how we want to determine alternatives and how we want to determine length of term. And I was going to bring up that last criteria, that length of term piece in our last 30 or 40 minutes of discussion so that it didn't bog down the names piece. Absolutely. My follow up question is, oh my gosh, I totally lost it. Oh, no, I got it. Okay. When you make your list is the earliest, the public can see it tomorrow or is there any chance that folks can see it tonight? I've heard this like hope that people will be able to see that and then testify tomorrow I know there's an urgency to get this done. And I think also an urgency to make sure the public can weigh in. You know, we are scheduled in this meeting until four o'clock. I have a four to four 30 and my goal was to put pen to paper on something for us to all look like right at 430 in the hopes that I could get it to our clerk's office in time to post. I don't want to promise that because I'm not sure how late we have the clerks tonight, but my hope is that we can get it up tonight. If we can't get it up tonight, then maybe I can try to share it with everybody up here so that we can at least send it to folks who have been asking. I don't love the idea that it's not publicly available. But we can think about what some options are there. Councilor Canola, are you back in the queue or had you just not lowered your hand? I think we just heard from you. Okay. Should we hear from some others? Okay. Councillor Ryan. So I think all of us are up here looking at these charts and doing our little calculations. I just want to say something for the record that what I'm pleased about when I look at the big nominating committee votes is there wasn't a lot of group think there like I think has been insinuated. So the block that was mentioned earlier, they only voted together three times as a block. And so I just want to lift the process in terms of the fact that I'm not seeing the group think like I thought I would. In fact, I see more incidences of the non police bodies that maybe did that more than what was referred and referenced to earlier about those that were representing police. So I just wanted to make sure I balanced that information. Thanks. And by the way, by now that I have the I respect the person who's been talked about quite a bit, Carly, as somebody who's wicked smart understands issue and shows objectivity and balance. So just so we don't continue to stereotype people up here and how we might think. I just want you to know I'm not against that. I was merely raising that in what looked like not a group think process. I was a little startled that there were some that did receive for as a way for us to try to whittle this down. It's hard. This is difficult. Yeah. Thanks. Thank you, Councillor. Councillor Novick. Hi. Councillor President, I just I can't remember whether you were saying that you thought maybe we should presently take everybody who got more than three votes or more than four votes. You said there's a cutoff of three, but I can't remember whether the cutoff is above the three or below the three. So if we cut off at three and above that would be 25 people. If we then added in, I've heard Jason Ashley's name more than anybody else below the line. And then I have also heard Linda Glenn, Harry Sheehan and Anshal Sharda. I'd note that Anshal Sharda was also I believe on the unanimous list for the community board for police accountability. So if we added in two of those four we would get to the 27. Thank you. Councillor Green. Thanks, Madam President. I think the process that you laid out is workable. I want to support it. I think it makes a lot of sense. And I say that because I've been highlighting with my little highlighter as we go along when I hear people's names. And that picks up a lot of them. And I think I could live with some of the people that I don't agree with necessarily politically in that list because I think the list is good. And it has a lot of the names that this body has advocated for. So I think using some discretion to add those to others. And then maybe if they're polarizing edge cases maybe their alternatives seems like a reasonable place to start. But I just want to signal my comfort for you to just take pen on this and come back with something because I think for me it kind of gets us to where we need to go on this. Can I ask a point of information for you to repeat it? Like how you described it? Because I think I supported too but I don't remember now. What I had suggested is that if we looked at anybody who was on three or more counselors priority lists. And then we would need to add in two more people. And there are four names that I have heard put out from folks below the line. Jason Ashley Lindeglen, Harry Sheehan and Anshal Sharda. So two of those four. And then the alternatives be the people who have had we could figure it out a few different ways. It could be the people who have had the most concern expressed. It could be based on the need for district representation. I think I was leaning toward concern expressed. And then we determined length of term. And some other way I had said that it that could either be based on looking at the direction around different lived experience. It could be looking at district representation. There are a few different ways we could think about that or we could do length of term based on a random number generator which I would then ask our neutral staff and council operations. And I would just request for her who had put these lists together for us if he would be willing to do that just so that there was no perception of anything going a rye with one of us doing that. Councillor Zimmerman? I think I'd support that. I mean, the 12 people that I put my name behind, I think a number of them would be in that category as you just described it and I think that that's a place that I'm quite comfortable. I had a question for Councillor Cunnell. You mentioned a need to balance race, but the only members whose race I know when I was doing this for people who cited it themselves in their narrative is there some other way in which you made your decision or you had available demographic information because I don't think I had demographic information available. Yeah, I mean a lot of people, so this is one of those unfortunate things where we get the process at the end and I want to note for the record that my criticism is not of anything that's in the council space or of that process, but we should have asked for more information there for an optional self identification in the application as well because this is a charter requirement that we do it. It's not something I'm coming up with. It specifically says or at least had a question of can you describe how you've experienced systemic racism, can you describe on the mental health addiction and all that and we didn't have a question on that. And we're stuck, you're right, but there are a bunch of people who did identify in some way. And so that's what I went off of, but the criteria that I, the criterion that I read out loud is from the city charter and it's in particularly those who've experienced systemic racism and those who've experienced mental illness addiction or alcoholism and this is charter 2-1002. But none of the questions were about that. I agree. Yeah, I agree. But there was some bond. This was a tough read given that there are actually specific needs that folks need to represent. And yet these questions were wide ranging in just how do you think about things? Yeah, I mean people did identify and there were questions that left the door open. I think we've talked to, not us, but society has talked about this in the context of like college applications. You can't ask about it specifically, but you talk about hardship and often people will cite the specific nature of the hardships that they may have felt they've experienced. So I think there, there is some data. It's not comprehensive and 100% you are correct. I think this is something that I hope the board will direct their director after they hire that person to figure out for future application processes and I was frustrated by that too. Okay, thanks. I just want to make sure I wasn't missing something that I, you know, at this point somebody said we all know each other's votes. I didn't know that and then you'd have mentioned that we knew race and I didn't know that. So yeah, so this is, this is, that's fine. I don't, I think I'm tracking now. And then with respect to the question of length of term, I think that random generation, unless a person said I can only do this many years would be preferred by me and and I'll leave it there. You asked that question I'm just saying I would prefer probably that generation also to be random. Thank you, Councillor. Colleagues, before I move on in the queue, is it helpful to have staff speak to not having the demographic information or Councillor Zimmerman and Canal do you feel good about where we are in that discussion? You're okay. You're okay. Okay. Councillor Cunnell. Thank you, Madam President. I appreciate the framing you've put on this in terms of the methodological approach. I think it's correct. I would note that the previous comments about identity and representation as it relates to Unchulshar that still apply for me and then I would note that the other person you named I believe was Harry Shean. Is that correct? There were four people below the line. Harry was one of them, whose name I've heard somebody advocate for and wrote down. And this is a person who was someone I didn't put in my top 15, but not a negative in any way, but they are from District 1. And I did want to point that out because I think if we are able to add, this would add two people to District 1's representation. It would also add a few to District 4's and a little less to District 3's to help mitigate those disparities. And I think that's an important note. So those would be the two that I would point to. I think the other two are both people I really liked, but they I think it's a question of balancing and choosing what would balance out the board I think the best. So those are two folks that I would argue for in this context. Thank you, Councillor Ryan. Yeah, I want to just lift the dialogue that was very decent and valid between the two Councillors in Vermont and can all I thought the question was really crisp and I didn't hear the exact answer like the fact that you which isn't a bad thing, you've been working in the space quite extensively. You seem to know by name, when you see the name, more demographic information perhaps than others because it was hard to find. So the question I heard was how did you know when there was most didn't really go into that type of detail in their narratives. And I think we're getting at a place of ethics here where maybe we need to identify who on our list do we know, do we have a personal relationship with? That's a consideration as we vote. I don't know if you're okay. Go right ahead, Councillor. So I think in the context of the folks we're discussing here, I know Trish Garner from Fick Hogg. I know Terrence Hayes from Fick Hogg and from Work at the Port on the Public Safety Service area. I don't know Erica Summerfield, Dean Aros, Benedict, Springer and Martaza. I do know for her and for Shed as I mentioned, Bob Weinstein I met during the campaign and here I don't know Bateman, such as Bob Ashley Glenn Graham Jenkins, she and Helmyn Bond, of course, I've heard of

### Chunk 8: 1:58:00–2:15:00

this would add two people to district ones representation. It would also add a few to district fours and a little less to district threes to help mitigate those disparities. And I think that's an important note. So those would be the two that I would point to. I think the other two are both people I really liked, but I think it's a question of balancing and choosing what would balance out the board, I think the best. So those are two folks that I would argue for in this context. Thank you, Councillor Raiyan. Yeah, I want to just lift the dialogue that was very decent and valid between the two counselors, Zimmerman and Kennell. I thought the question was really crisp and I didn't hear the exact answer. Like the fact that you, which isn't a bad thing, you've been working in this space quite extensively, you seem to know by name, when you see the name, more demographic information perhaps than others, because it was hard to find. So the question I heard was how did you know when there was most didn't really go into that type of detail in their narratives? And I think we're getting at a place of ethics here where maybe we need to identify who on our list do we know? Do we have a personal relationship with? That's a consideration as we vote. I have one of those. Of course you can, because I mean, I hope you're okay. Go right ahead, Councillor. This is looking right at. So, Councillor Knoll. Yeah, I think in the context of the folks we're discussing here, I know Trish Garner from Fick Hogg. I know Terence Hayes from Fick Hogg and from work at the public safety service area. I don't know Erica Summerfield, Dina Ross, Benedict, to the springer and Brasazza. I do know for sure, and for Shed as I mentioned, Bob Weinstein I met during the campaign and here I don't know Bateman, so Trumbom Ashley Glenn, Graham Jenkins, she and Helmyn Bond, of course, I've heard of Landgraver because I believe he was a candidate too. I don't know rocked, Charda or Wilson. I think I've mentioned everybody above that was relevant that's been discussed. I think it may be fair to say I'm in an assumption on one name that is about an ethnic background. That's not a, but that's a guess. The rest it's all based off of the application itself. They're people who said as a Latino, who does well abroad. I think that's a fair, that's part of the application. I think in the context of my own ethnic background, I could make an educated guess on that particular one. Thank you, Councillor Knull. That's what I was looking for in that answer to the question that Councillor Zimba and I asked you. Happy to provide. Colleagues, I'm not seeing anyone else in the queue. Does anyone have other folks who they want to raise either support or concerns for other thoughts on process or any other discussion? One, one. Yes. Okay, I'm seeing, I'm hearing Zimerman and then Avalos. Councillor Zimerman. Yeah, thanks, colleagues. I, when we first started, it was noted that one applicant who's fairly high on our list was a Vancouver resident. And while I recognize that that's, I guess, allowable by this charter, that does strike me as strange, right? I think that I want accountability to be doled out by people who live here, potentially vote here, but at least have the right to if they want. That seems like a real stretch to me. And the person, I will say, was on my yes list. So I say that in a self-serving way, or a negatively self-serving way for my own list, is that that address is concerning. If it's the name that you all shared with me a few minutes ago, but am I alone in that concern? Or should we be appointing people from not only outside of our city, but outside of our state to be doling out decisions for our employees? That one is a little tough for me. And I would entertain that part of the conversation if it is helpful. So, I think that's a good question. I think that's a good question. I think that's a good question. Councillor Ovalos, go ahead. And then I think some folks are getting in the queue to answer that question. Councillor Zimmerman, go ahead, Councillor Ovalos. Well, I'll start by reflecting on that question. That is a criteria that's for all of our boards. And yeah, I guess I'll be honest. I've always felt it was a little weird that people that didn't live in Portland could be on our boards. But the qualification is that if they work in our city, then they have a perspective to offer, even though they don't live here. I don't feel strongly, but I do agree that that has always been a criteria that I've found out for what it's worth. Let's see. What did I actually get in the queue to talk about? Put all my brain energy towards that that I lost it. So maybe let me think a little bit more. Thanks. Thank you, Councillor Murrion. I would say to answer Councillor Zimmerman's question, it doesn't bother me too much because I think if someone is working in the city of Portland, they're going to be affected by how our police force operates. And so it would make sense that they would want to be a part of the police accountability commission. I also think it's a little different than someone who lives out of state because they're probably not going to work in the city of Portland unless they drive a really long time every day for work. Oh, okay, in Vancouver. Most of our police force lives in Vancouver as well. So I feel like it, I don't know, it doesn't really necessarily bother me. She was in my top 15, not necessarily like my top, you know, top six if I had to pick, but I would say overall, if this is the standard for our commission, then it doesn't make sense for us to change the rules now. Are we going to list, Councillor, or Councillor Preston, do you want us to list like all of the ones that we were pushing for or what's going to be best to make your list? Or do you want us to email those to you? You know, if we go forward with the idea that anybody who is a three and above or who has had some strong advocacy and that's, there's four people who I've named who I've heard strong advocacy for. I don't think I need you to read your full list. If we're going to move forward with a different way of adding people to the list, then I think it's better because we have everybody's lists here, right? We don't know who's is who, but we have everybody's list here. And I want to try to keep this process such that it's making sure that there is some, I don't know, some, not neutrality. I don't want to see everybody's lists and be in a position of picking and choosing between us. That doesn't seem like it's fair to anybody up here. But I am trying to capture whose names have been added to the three and above whose names have I heard more than once as folks are talking. That makes perfect sense. Yeah, I didn't consider that. Okay. Well, yeah, I think if our police live in Vancouver, I think it's a good idea to have a police report. I think it's a good idea to have a police report. It works in the city of Portland to also sit on a police accountability board. I'm kind of information. Because this is what I remembered what I was going to ask and it's about what you just said. So are you then looking at this. So I've got everything in green. That's 15. And then you add everyone up to the three all the way down to Sarah Citronbaum. And that's the 25. And then you were saying that the other two would come to the list. And then you were asking us to look at below Citronbaum and have everybody say which ones we like in that list. And then that that'll be you'll pick the top two. Is that how you were? I was trying to understand your process. Like is that does that where you were suggesting essentially? You know, if we have everybody name who was on their list, we're going to have all of these people named either once or twice. Right? Because they have ones and twos by them. What I mean, but I mean, if we pick from that, right? Like for example, for me, out of everything below Citronbaum, I had lifted up Anshall and Jason, right? So then if everybody goes and does that, then would we have like maybe that could be a good start? Because then we could say, okay, maybe, you know, 10 out of 12 of us picked Anshall. So then that's one of the two or does that make sense for them asking? It does. I had written down a little more informally the names that I had heard from below that line. And there were four names that I had heard lifted up. But we could certainly go around and have everybody lift up two names from that list. I know for me, that's a little harder because I want to go look at the applications again. And I think I see nods from a few other people saying the same thing. Let me, let me think about how we might address that. Heidi, did you want to note something related to the conversation about folks living out of Portland? Yeah, Council President, I just wanted Councillor Lillian to know that it's in. Code, they, that folks need to either live or work in Portland to serve on the board. So it is limited to that, but it is in code rather than a general practice in this particular instance. Thank you. Thank you. Councillor Green. Thank you. I just wanted to respond to the question that Councillor Zimmerman posed because I think it's an important one to think through. So setting aside the kind of code requirement question or in this space where we might be making a marginal choice on someone maybe based upon where they live. I mean, I get the intuitive concern, but Portland is in the middle of a metropolitan region that includes Vancouver, Washington. And I think a lot of people who used to live in Portland now live in Vancouver, Washington because they can no longer afford to live in Portland, but they still might be rude in this community. It's the same thing that you see with people who were from Albina who now live in Eastside, Portland. I mean, they might live in Gresham. And so I do think that there's kind of a skin in the game piece to that. And if they go out of this length to apply and they've made through all these hoops, I see that person is vested in Portland. So that's kind of where I'm coming from on that. Quick follow up. Do you see a difference in an oversight board, which I take that to have authority versus an advisory board, which is how for us to best do our work? Do you see a difference in those two things? I'm feeling a difference, but I'm not sure if that lands differently for people. I don't. Councillor Cramellain. I'm thinking a lot about your question, Councillor Zimmerman. My gut response is I feel like folks should be in Portland. I also think this is a larger conversation about our advisory bodies. I'm not sure if it should be the same if it's an oversight board or a committee, but I think they're going to speak consistency with all of those of those levels. I would say at this point, it should we should go with what it says in code and what we have been doing for other appointments. And there have been some where I've thought, oh, interesting. That person doesn't live in that district or I have thought that. I will say this is just going with my gut. If there are only two representatives right now in those top in district three, district one and district four, I see that from my Googling, there are four people here that live outside of Portland. I think it would feel out of balance if there were more people outside of Portland than say any one district. But let's just throw something out there. Councillor Canola, are you back in the queue or is that an old hand? Yeah, I just wanted to note that in this particular case, this is different. A lot of our advisory groups have live work, play, worship, or go to school. And this is put into code, which is a very difficult code to change due to the need for federal oversight as part of our settlement agreement. And this was put into more narrow way. I think it's possible Councillor Ryan might be able to speak to why that was narrowed down by the old council from the recommendations of the PAC. But this particular individual, their answer to number 14 might help alleviate some of the concern possibly. Born and raised in Portland went to Jefferson High School. I believe that. I also think that for me, the state line is not relevant. I think it's Gresham Hillsborough, Vancouver. We've talked about all these things. But I think it's important to note that we will be seeing training for the members after they're appointed in the particular state law, especially as it relates to collective bargaining, which frankly, most people don't know even in the state that they do live in. I'll also note that this particular individual noted in their application, and this is question eight, that they have lived in Portland for at least 12 months. It's possible that they, that the address is just wrong in some way. If you apply for a job in the neo-gov portal, you're at, and then you later apply again, your personal data just holds, unless you manually update it. So this was a check that was done by the city attorneys. That is one of the two people that was ruled out. As far as I've been told that one of the two people ruled out is because they didn't live or work in the city of Portland. So I trust that they have checked this individual on that that they have met the criteria. But what I will say is that it's not a particular concern to me. I don't see a difference between oversight and advisory boards as it relates to live and work, and as it relates to the other three criteria, which are play, worship, or go to school. I think that's already been addressed as part of the code change or the code creation, I should say, which is a difference between that and the purely advisory board roles that we have here is that we require someone to be in town on a regular basis, not just, you know, I come play pickleball or dodgeball or whatever, casually in the city. Thanks. Councillor Zimmerman, I also wanted to respond to your question about location. And as I was reviewing applications, it looked to me like there were four people who didn't live in Portland. Very frankly, I held a higher standard to those applications because of that. I thought if you don't live here, I have a higher bar for how I want you to be looking at these things. Maybe that's not fair. Maybe it is. But that was part of the standard that I used. And this individual who's in the top 15 was the only person who doesn't live in Portland that I put on my initial list because I thought that their application was so strong that despite the fact that their address was elsewhere, I thought that they would be a very important voice to have on this oversight body. I thought that if we use the criteria that I suggested, we do capture at least one and possibly two more of the four people who don't live in Portland. Before I suggested that criteria, that was one of the things that I thought about was capturing that one additional person.

### Chunk 9: 2:13:00–2:28:25

work in the city of Portland. So I trust that they have checked this individual on that, that they have met the criteria. But what I will say is that it's not a particular concern to me. I don't see a difference between oversight and advisory boards as it relates to live and work, and as it relates to the other three criteria, which are play, worship, or go to school. I think that's already been addressed as part of the code change, or the code creation, I should say. Which is a difference between that and the purely advisory board roles that we have here, is that we require someone to be in town on a regular basis, not just, you know, I come play pickleball or dodgeball, or whatever, casually in the city. Thanks. Councilor Zimmerman, I also wanted to respond to your question about location. And as I was reviewing applications, it looked to me like there were four people who didn't live in Portland. And very frankly, I held a higher standard to those applications because of that. I thought if you don't live here, I have a higher bar for how I want you to be looking at these things. Maybe that's not fair. Maybe it is. But that was part of the standard that I used. And this individual who's in the top 15 was the only person who doesn't live in Portland that I put on my initial list because I thought that their application was so strong that despite the fact that their address was elsewhere, I thought that they would be a very important voice to have on this oversight body. I'll note that if we use the criteria that I suggested, we do capture at least one and possibly two more of the four people who don't live in Portland. Before I suggested that criteria, that was one of the things that I thought about was capturing that one additional person. But I do think that the person in the 15 at least had such a strong application that it seemed to me like it was worth moving forward with them. Councillor Dunfayne. Yeah, thank you. I'm responding to Councillor Zimmerman's response. I'll be honest, I absolutely do have a problem with. I don't understand it was in the criteria. I understand that this is how we do things. But I do think that this, I think that in general, people should live in the city of Portland. If you live here, you're assuming you're here for 16 hours a day versus the 8 and you spend to work. And when I was going through these applications, anybody who did not live in the city of Portland got a point counted against them and anybody who lived in District 1 got a point added to them for me. Zoe, it is reflected in the way I voted. But I do think that, I think it is worth having a bigger conversation as this body as well. It might be too late for this. And I also think that it's incredible that anybody wants to step up and volunteer. But yeah, I do think that there's a difference between Supervisory and Advisory. And I do think that especially with this, especially because I also have heard the critique from the community that police should live in Portland, then probably the folks who are advising us how the police, whether or not the Brisbane's behavior should also live in Portland. I'm not going to vote against a whole package because of it, but I do want to just voice that. So. Thank you, Councillor. Councillor Zimmerman. I appreciate those who were able to respond. It's helpful. It's an interesting part of the conversation. Given that I know Councillor Presley, you keep on mentioning that on Shell, Sharda is mentioned by many people as a person of interest for that next tier. I've heard the name, but I've only seen one person who voted for them in our selection criteria. And I will also say they're not a Portlander. With only one vote, I just, if people were truly supportive of that person, if that's one of the couple of names that sounds like you're kind of zeroing in on as part of a package, I would say, well, let's remember, only one person put them and they don't live in Portland. It might be, I think there were some other twos in there that perhaps would be easier to check, but I'm maybe sensing that name, that application is getting more talk in this discussion than what our actual ranking shows by anybody's standards. Thanks. I think you're right. There are a couple of people who only had one or two votes. You have had more people name them in the room. Angel Sharda wasn't on my list because of geography. I am noting that they have an email address at PSU and I don't know if that is because they work there or if that is because they are working and taking classes there, it says they have a master's degree and I don't know if they're currently working on that or not, but it's perhaps worth rereading the application. I just wanted to respond to that applicant specifically. They weren't in my top 15, but I wouldn't mind them being on the committee either. They're an immigrant, woman of color, and I thought that their objective portion of the application was pretty good. They were talking about wanting fair, transparent, and community-driven oversight. And I think a perspective that they bring that would be a good example. A perspective that they bring that would be really valuable if we're trying to diversify the voices on this. They had talked in their application about cultural and systemic barriers as well. And so while they weren't in my top 15, I think that they would be an important perspective to have as well. Thank you, Councillor Cannell. Yeah, I want to know, I erroneously said earlier that I made an assumption based on the name and now going through this application, I realized it actually was mentioned in the application. So I wanted to correct that record there. I think I don't know, and this is hard, right? Because we didn't see, we didn't have a question on this specifically, but I do feel a need to argue for API representation on this body. And I don't know that anybody else, because nobody else identified, and this is a little bit of a crapshoot in that regard, but I don't think anybody else disclosed that in any way. So I think it's possible that somebody else on this list is API, I don't know that in any way. So I do feel a need to argue that point as well. I guess more broadly than these four individuals, I think there was maybe a disconnect in terms of what the purpose of this conversation is, we could have just ranked and picked the top 21. That wasn't the process that was laid out, and the reason for that was so that the remaining six could be a discussion. And I appreciate that immensely. I talked to the council president about this a while ago, because this is a conversation, and actually the vice president about other advisory groups too, that there's a conversation where if we end up not having the discussion part, we miss the opportunity to fill the gaps that our blind rankings might give us. And we end up without that representation. And in this particular case, having some of that representation be charter required is I think particularly compelling to me. That doesn't mean this individual has to be the person to do that. There's every person here brings, everybody here has something that they bring that may or may not be replicated in the other folks depending on who else gets picked. But I just wanted to sort of, this is less about the applicant, and more about the process. I'll leave it there. Thank you, Councillor. And you're right, we did. You and I had some, some I think important discussions about not just picking the top ones. My recommendation to do that was based on most of the names I was hearing being in that group. But I think there's, we certainly want to think about that representation as we pulled the other two in and as I go through and think about who were the more controversial names and what does that mean in terms of the balance representation? I think given this conversation, I see where you're going with that. I was making a broader, but yeah, I agree. Councillor, is there any other discussion, any other comments, other things that you would like to note during our time here today? Yes. Sorry. Councillor Avalos. I guess I just want to understand what, let me do. I want to understand what is going to happen tomorrow. So you're going to put together a list that you're going to come to us with tomorrow that ideally will be a package will pass. Like does it end there or is there going to be discussion tomorrow, is there going to be any kind of like, oh, okay, this was the list that was comprised because I'm not fully clear on how you're going to make that final list that there will be, how do you foresee that happening if people object to something on the list tomorrow or is it the expectation that we're leaving it? This has been filed as a report, so we will need to vote to adopt it. And we can, I'm looking to our attorneys to make sure that Heidi's not going to tell me this is wrong. We can amend a report attachment, correct? Correct. That's been my assumption. So I'll take this back and, try to bring in the feedback that I've heard today to make a list. I'll probably stick it in front of our community and public safety co-chairs because I generally try to reach out to the folks who are chairing committees as we're making decisions on important things. And then tonight, file my best thinking with that screening of our community and public safety co-chairs and putting you on notice, Councillor Novick and you're not in the room, Councillor Cannell nodded, yes, when I said that, hopefully you are too. And I'll file that if we need to make amendments tomorrow because we missed the mark, we can make amendments tomorrow. My hope is that it won't miss the mark and that folks will look at it and say it might not be everything that I wanted. It's certainly not going to be everything I wanted. There's some folks who I had thought really highly of, who others clearly didn't put in there, their priority list and that's okay. But hopefully it's something that we can generally feel good about and move forward. And if not, you are of course welcome to propose amendments. And then is that list also going to have the terms and the alternatives? And so you're gonna also be that part? There'll be a proposal with everything, yes. And this is, yeah, my Vice President Client Malayne was just mentioning behind me as well. This is filed to receive public testimony. So presumably we'll have some folks who are signed up to testify. Councillors, Councillor Canola, are you back in the queue? Yeah, just really quick. Wanted to say to those who applied, I apologize that we have to talk about you in personal terms. We need to work on getting our public meetings a lot changed at the state back to allow for some of this to happen where we're not discussing people. So directly. And there are a lot of people here that I think didn't make it when people's taught 50 and it's not a reflection on them. I do share a concern around not necessarily having all the information I'll follow up with staff for the public presentation tomorrow. And I just wanted to flag that. I think this is not a problem on our end at the Council. I think this is staff. I'd love to make sure we have bio statements of interest, the opportunity for applicants to come in. And we can talk about that more later, but I just wanted to flag that for later. Thank you, Madam President. Thank you, Councillor. Councillors, any other discussion? Before we close, I just want to take the opportunity to reiterate my gratitude to everybody who applied and has gone through this process. There was a lot of different steps of vetting to try to window down the group of applicants to the first people who are going to serve. And whether you made our finalist or not, whether you were windowed down earlier or later in the process, I know there were a huge number of really fantastic applicants. And so I want to just express my gratitude to everybody who was willing to step up and be a part of something that is going to take a lot of time and is going to be hard because this work will be hard. I also want to thank all of the volunteers who were on the nominating committee because I know that they put a lot of time into this and worked together to bring us the list that they thought were the very best people to help us with this work as we move forward. So gratitude to everybody who has been involved in this process in one way or another. Colleagues all put something together maybe even before my four o'clock meetings since it looks like we're ending early to run by our colleagues who are on the Community and Public Safety Committee and will do my very best to work with the clerk's office to make sure that it is filed before our clerks leave for the day so that folks can look at it starting tonight online. And then we'll be taking this up tomorrow in our council meeting which is an evening council meeting. Some members of the public should have the full day tomorrow to review the list if they're interested in providing testimony. Thank you all for your discussion today. I know this wasn't easy. With that, I will close our work session.